---
title: 'Creating dojoBook Pt. 1- Generating the Application'
date: '2015-05-04'
description:
tags: [ruby, ruby on rails, cms]
---

This is the first part of a long series of posts that will act simultaneously
as a place to write and record the progress of creating a social networking site
in Ruby on Rails and act as a tutorial to those who wish to learn how to create a 
social networking site in Rails. This project is motivated by another Rails application that I recently
took over that includes outdated ways of programming in Rails.
This project will also serve as practice to upgrading the old Rails application and 
I will eventually use this project as a boilerplate for other applications that
require similar features. 

The requires Ruby version 2.1.5, RVM, and Rails 4.1.5. Any other gems, packages,
or ancillary parts will be stated as we move along during the course of the project.
You will also need a text editor. I am currently using [Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/),
which is my preferred text editor. If you don't know how to install Ruby or Ruby Rails, please 
see [here](http://rubyonrails.org/download/)

We begin by creating a new project in the command line:

 ` rails new dojoCMS ` 

This will [generate](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html#creating-the-blog-application) a project called "dojoCMS." Once this is done, change directory into the 
folder like this:

` cd dojoCMS ` 

We will then generate our first scaffold:

`rails generate scaffold status name:string content:text` 

This will create a model called Status along with its respective controller and 
views. We will dive into what models, views, and controllers are when we get 
more in depth to the application.

After the Status scaffold has been generated, we have to run a migration.

` rake db:migrate `

After you run the [migration](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_migrations.html#migration-overview), you can start the rails server and check to see
if you can create, edit, update, and deleted statuses. Run 

`rails s` 

(short for rails server)

After the Rails [server](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/command_line.html#rails-server) starts, go to your browser and type localhost:3000. 
You should see the default "Welcome" screen that is generated by Ruby On Rails.
If you go to localhost:3000/statuses on your browser, you should be able to see
a link that says "New Status." Click on that link, fill in a new a status, and 
create it.

Congratulations, you have created your first status!